imagine yourself relaxing at home one day when
you suddenly hear a knock at the front door to
your amazement it appears to be none other than
John de Lancie himself standing on your doorstep
hello he says my name is Q from the Q continuum
just stopping by to let you know that I'm an
omnipotent God you should probably start bowing
before me or else I might get really upset that's
cool you think you've never met an omnipotent
being before but hey he seems like a pretty honest
guy and you're probably not very keen on the
idea of getting turned into a frog right now so
naturally you take him completely at his word and
start bowing right that second am i right no of
course not you're skeptical maybe this person is
telling you the truth or maybe this person is just
some weirdo pulling your leg so you demand some
basic empirical evidence to show that this being
really is what he says he is all right he says you
want proof you got it the next thing you know mr.
Q snaps his fingers and in a brilliant flash
of light your car is suddenly transformed into
a giant pile of squirrels it's a very impressive
trick to be sure and maybe even enough to warrant
a sincere placation of this being however we're
all hard-nosed philosophers around here and we
want to be as sure as we possibly can so let's
put this guy to the test and see whether or not
he truly deserves the title of omnipotent rather
than say really really awesome and powerful you
might be forgiven for thinking that this was
a perfectly straightforward question to ask
and in any other context it probably would be but
religious philosophy has a really funny habit of
tripping all over itself whenever questions like
this crop up because as simple and intuitive as
this problem may seem most religious philosophers
cannot for the life of themselves seem to answer
it coherently it's an elegant little thought
experiment that perfectly captures the bizarre
mental gymnastics of Christian apologetics as
well as some of the foundational failings of
their entire philosophical world it's also a
really fun exercise in basic critical thinking
skill that takes us over a surprisingly broad
spectrum of interesting philosophical subjects
that's why I personally find this question to
be so strangely fascinating and why I think
you'll enjoy following me down the looming rap
whole that it represents to begin our analysis
let's frame the question in terms of something
a little more mundane rather than claim to be a
full-on omnipotent deity suppose instead that
our stranger merely claims to be a reasonably
competent automobile mechanic it's basically the
exact same situation as before but now framed in a
completely non religious context so ask yourself
now how exactly should we go about verifying
this claim after all it's not like we just take
random people completely at their word for this
stuff there's real money at stake here plus the
functionality of our cars surely there must be
some sort of test we can offer before honoring him
with such a title right obviously the answer is
yes and it works like this go and get out a piece
of paper and write the following words at the top
things that a competent automobile mechanic should
be able to do after that you just enumerate the
list with a collection of pertinent challenges for
example number one change a tire number two change
oil number three flush coolant number four and so
on until you've completely populated the list once
finished you can then issue your challenge
in the following fashion dear mr. stranger
given the proper tools workspace assistance etc
I challenge you to complete each of these items
on my list within a reasonable amount of time or
if the list happens to be infinite in length then
at least complete a reasonable sampling of items
until I'm satisfied they're done if our subject is
successful then great is officially earned himself
the title of competent automobile mechanic and if
not then oh well maybe he's just pretty good with
cars or perhaps halfway decent that's fine too
they're just words and labels now to be fair this
isn't exactly how we go about our daily lives but
it does illustrate an important philosophical
aspect over the nature of language doctors
lawyers presidents squirrels rocks potatoes
Thor all just labels that we define and assign
in accordance with a distinct set of empirically
verifiable properties anything that demonstrates
the properties of a given list may officially earn
the corresponding title while things which fail to
satisfy those properties are simply not referred
to as such it's basically a form of philosophical
verification ISM and it presents a foundational
pillar on which human language operates with that
in mind let's go back to our supposedly omnipotent
friend mr. Q start by getting out a piece of paper
and writing the following words at the top things
that an omnipotent being should be able to do what
items go on the list now the answer it turns
out depends a lot on who you ask for example
according to one school of thought the answer
is pretty simple anything literally anything you
can think of goes on the list make it rain frogs
check create a married bachelor you got it flarg
alas nuffin sure why not this is a naive form of
omnipotence commonly referred to as absolutism or
absolute omnipotence Rene Descartes was a famous
defender of this position and even some modern
philosophers have periodically defended it as well
it's actually pretty easy to see where this idea
comes from given that the Bible itself practically
screams this interpretation at you for instance
Matthew 19:26 mark 10 27 Luke 1:37 job 42 - and
Philippians 4:13 despite its intuitive basis in
Christian scripture the idea of absolutism is
clearly riddled with problems for example take
the challenge of flogging a snuffin according to
absolutism mr. Q here should be perfectly capable
of doing exactly that without a second thought yet
it should be obvious by now floral and snuffin are
just gibberish words I made up out of nothing
they have no established definition so pray tell
what exactly could our subject ever do that would
satisfy the challenge bear in mind now that this
is not a limitation on our subject per se but a
simple problem of language it's like mashing my
keyboard with random characters and saying here
do this there's simply nothing to do I may as
well just stand there in silence or perhaps shrug
my shoulders and grunt mr. Q cannot ever hope to
fulfill a challenge if no coherent challenge was
actually given notice that a similar argument also
applies to the challenge of creating a married
bachelor by definition a bachelor is an unmarried
man which means the creation of a married bachelor
is the same thing as creating a married man who
is also not married a logical contradiction the
set of all things that are married is mutually
exclusive to the set of all things that are
not married that therefore it doesn't matter
what mr. queue ever presents to me because the
rules of logic forbid me from ever recognizing
a successful outcome again that's not a limitation
on our subject but another limitation on language
itself the very words used to formulate the
challenge are simply put together wrongly this
is exactly why absolutism is generally regarded as
a pretty terrible form of omnipotence nevertheless
it is important to recognize that the death of
absolutism does not necessarily imply the death
of God all it says is that whatever things are
out there for us to give labels to none of them
will ever be able to demonstrate omnipotence to
any rational satisfaction and since no being can
ever possibly earn itself such a title even
in principle the title itself is essentially
meaningless if however we simply redefine on
evidence to mean something slightly different then
all of the problems we just talked about would
immediately vanish in a puff of logic remember
now that all we're trying to do here at the end of
the day is define a word if that word is coherent
logical and verifiable then great we can use it
to describe various entities in our environment if
and when we ever happen to encounter them but if
the word is incoherent or logically inconsistent
then oh well it's not like the universe cares one
way or the other all it means is that we can't use
the word to meaningfully describe stuff time to
go back to the drawing board and see if we can't
think of something better much to the credit
of religious philosophers today that seems to
be exactly what happened rather than literally
be capable of doing anything a far more common
view of omnipotence is the ability to do all
that is logically possible it's a perfectly
straightforward revision that specifically seeks
to avoid the incoherence of absolutism while still
preserving the totality of power we've come to
expect and that's a good thing so let's all get
out a piece of paper and write the following words
at the top logically possible actions what exactly
does this mean how do we determine whether or not
some particular task should go on the list here's
how I interpret it consider a simple challenge
like eita taco if i can imagine some logically
possible world wherein that task is being
performed by some agent then good it goes
on the list for example I can imagine a logically
possible world where it is true that the President
of the United States is eating a taco therefore
it seems to me it must be logically possible to
eat a taco it is officially something that can be
done and therefore it must go on the list anything
that wishes to call itself omnipotent must have
therefore be able to replicate that feat that
was easy enough so let's shake things up a bit by
asking a very simple question is it or is it not
logically possible to tell a lie obviously the
answer has to be yes because people around the
world tell lies all the time therefore by modal
axiom B it must be logically possible to tell a
lie therefore by the definition of omnipotence
all omnipotent beings must be able to tell lies
strangely enough however the Holy Christian Bible
says outright that lying is something God cannot
do not just something that God doesn't do or
chooses not to do but literally cannot do see for
example Titus 1:2 or Hebrews 6:18 so right off the
bat the very definition offered by professional
Christian philosophers themselves has immediately
precluded their very own God from being omnipotent
isn't that funny but let's ignore that little
problem anyway and see what else we can find wrong
with this definition how about this go outside
and start collecting rocks into a giant pile keep
piling up rocks until the pile is so heavy that
you cannot ever hope to lift them congratulations
you have just created a finite pile of rocks
that officially satisfies the description of
being unlifted bull by its own maker therefore
it must be logically possible to create a pile
of rocks or even a single rock that satisfies the
description of being unlifted oh by its own maker
therefore all omnipotent beings must be able to
replicate this task so let's pose the challenge
shall we dear mr. Q I challenge you to create a
finite Rock such that its own maker cannot lift
it go so far so good right but what happens if
mr. Q actually succeeds in this challenge after
all last time I checked it is always logically
possible to lift a finite Rock notice how this
is just a simple variation on the paradox
of the stone can God create a rock so heavy
that even God himself cannot lift it it's a famous
philosophical challenge to the idea of omnipotence
because it logically prevents any being from
ever demonstrating such a property by definition
all omnipotent beings must at any given moment
possess the power to both create rocks and to
lift rocks subject to certain specifications yet
the moment our subject creates a rock he cannot
lift he cannot possibly satisfy the definition of
omnipotence anymore that means no being can ever
possibly earn the title of omnipotence because
the very act of proving it requires them to not
have it notice also that we could just as easily
frame this exact same problem any number of ways
for example one of my personal favorites is to
stand before a podium and truthfully speak the
words I am NOT omnipotent again it's a perfectly
logical task in that I can imagine a logically
possible world where this is taking place
therefore at any given moment and omnipotent
being must by definition be able to replicate
that task stand before a podium and truthfully
speak the words I am NOT omnipotent unfortunately
the only way to actually possess such a power is
by not being omnipotent bear in mind now that
this is not some clever philosophical trick but
a fundamental property of binary propositional
logic self referential propositions when coupled
with logical negations tend to produce really
goofy inconsistencies it's the exact same reason
why we have so many other famous paradoxes as
well for example the liars paradox Russell's
paradox the halting problem and even girdle's
incompleteness theorems are all just similar
manifestations of self referential negation
so it's not like I'm just making this stuff up
because philosophers logicians and mathematicians
have been studying this exact same phenomenon for
centuries we therefore must conclude that the
capacity to do all that as logically possible
is ironically not a logical possibility you can
either be complete or you can be consistent but
you cannot have both simultaneously at this point
you would think that most Christians would simply
say something like y-yes that seems to be a bit
of an issue perhaps my conception of omnipotence
is just a little bit too greedy let's maybe learn
from the last hundred years of mathematical logic
and see if we can't find something a little less
contradictory but of course the exact opposite
is generally true with haqq philosophers around
the world dogmatically clinging to their precious
definition anyway for instance one complaint
that you might hear is how the challenge itself
is inherently ambiguous when I create a rock the
word maker refers to myself the person speaking to
you right now yet when someone else performs the
same task the meaning of maker suddenly changes in
other words the challenge shares the same type of
proposition but not the same token thus in order
for the challenge to be comparable mr. Q would not
need to create a rock that he cannot lift but only
create a rock that I cannot lift this may sound
like a somewhat reasonable point at first but
quickly falls apart the moment you actually stop
and think about it for starters we don't have to
use the word maker if we don't want to we could
have challenged our subject to create a rock so
heavy that no being in the universe could lift it
or better yet stand before a podium in truthfully
state the proposition that there are no omnipotent
beings there's still logically possible actions in
some logically possible world which means they
still have to go on the list the real problem
however is that all actions are inherently self
referential 2cy simply imagine what would happen
if I challenged you right now to eat a taco
naturally if you're like most people the obvious
interpretation of that task is to immediately
grab a taco and start shoving it into your face
if however you were to then challenged me to
replicate that task what exactly do you imagine
happening next do I begin shoving a taco into my
own face or must I literally shove a second taco
into your face and force you to eat it obviously
the former interpretation is the correct viewpoint
because that's how every english-speaking human
on the planet understands it the only point of
issuing a challenge like this in the first place
is to see if you have the power within yourself
to replicate a power that I had within myself yet
for some strange reason the moment we try to apply
this same line of Reason within a religious
philosophical context then all of a sudden
people start acting like a bunch of pedantic
morons by invoking the type token distinction
in this way it is literally meaningless for me to
challenge you to eat a taco I have to instead say
something horribly obtuse like I challenge you
to bring about the event of you eating this taco
well I'm sorry guys but events are not the same
thing as actions and I should not have to specify
a particular act or in order to coherently define
some particular act when you challenge me to jump
five feet in the air you obviously mean that I
have to propel myself with my own legs off the
ground beneath me if however I then challenge
you to jump five feet in the air then obviously
you must now propel yourself off the ground with
your legs all logically possible actions are in
some way or another inherently self referential
deal with it with that taken care of the next
most common objection I tend to hear is that
omnipotence doesn't really mean the ability to
do all that is logically possible rather it
means something more like the ability to do
all that is consistent with one's nature that
is to say if the proposition Y is doing X is
logically self consistent then for an omnipotent
being it will always be true that Y can do X ok
fair enough if you want to just summarily change
the definition of omnipotence again then that's
great it was a bad definition from the beginning
and we can only grow as philosophers by trying
to find something better but can we please all be
grown-up enough to admit that this is nothing more
than an indirect admission of defeat the previous
definition was inherently flawed and so now we're
changing it into something else yet whenever
I talk to Christian apologists about this they
almost always pretend as if the new definition
is really what it was supposed to be all along
and how dare I strawman such brilliant thinkers
by ever suggesting otherwise fine whatever let's
just roll with it and see what we can find this
time shot we can an omnipotent being tell a lie
or what typically the answer to this question
is that it depends on the being for example the
god of Christianity cannot tell a lie because
doing so would contradict his perfectly honest
nature thus to ask God to tell a lie is the
logical equivalent to asking a perfectly honest
being - not to be perfectly honest apparently a
logical contradiction but don't worry God still
gets to be omnipotent anyway because he can still
do all the things that are consistent with his
divine unchanging nature likewise God cannot stand
before a podium and shout I am NOT omnipotent
because that would produce a contradiction as
well omnipotence is an inherent part of God's
nature so therefore it doesn't have to go on a
list of things that God can do BAM problem solved
this is usually the part where I begin to lose
all patience with religious philosophers because
responses like this are clearly not well thought
out it really gets under my skin too because it
represents a profound laziness that makes no
effort whatsoever to consider the practical
implications of what is actually being said to
illustrate simply imagine God himself standing
on my doorstep in all his glory when I issued the
following challenge dear God I challenge you right
now to tell me a lie tell me that you're a potato
go pray tell what exactly do Christians imagine
happening next because as far as I can tell they
seem to imagine something like that scene from
liar liar where Jim Carrey tries to say that the
pen is red but just can't bring himself to do it
as if some invisible metaphysical force of honesty
is somehow preventing the words from coming out of
his mouth call me crazy but I hardly find that
to be consistent with the idea of unlimited
potentiality or maybe Christians just imagined God
standing there with a dumb look on his face as if
he didn't even understand the question or what
if he just says I'm sorry but that would violate
my essential nature no thanks what in the hell
am I supposed to do with that but let's take it
one step further suppose you challenge me to lift
a thousand pound car over my head oh except that
I'm sorry that would violate my essential nature
you see I'm a beam comprised physical muscle mass
that can only lift 200 pounds when you ask me
to lift a thousand pounds you're asking me to
perform a contradiction a being that cannot lift
more than 200 pounds is lifting more than 200
pounds not only that but any challenge you give
me can be counteracted in the exact same way no
being can logically be expected to do the things
it cannot do so congratulations my dear Christians
you've solved the omnipotence paradox all you
had to do was replace it with the omnipotence
tautology literally anything and everything in
the universe is now omnipotent because nothing
can ever logically do the things it cannot do
aha I hear you saying it is only incidental
that you cannot lift a thousand pounds I can still
imagine a possible world wherein you are lifting
a thousand pounds over your head therefore it
may be logically possible but not physically
possible actually no what you're imagining right
now isn't me it may be an entity very similar to
me but that's not really me because as we just
established I am NOT a being who can lift a
thousand pounds over my head or better yet let's
just play that same game in Reverse I can imagine
a possible world wherein God is telling a lie
now what what's the difference why is lying a
violation of God's essential nature but lifting
a thousand pounds is totally consistent with mine
because as far as I can tell this entire line
of reasoning appears to be nothing more than
blatant special pleading when God can't do a thing
then it must be because it violates his essential
nature yet when I can't do a thing and apparently
it's little more than a conditional happenstance
of my feeble limited existence so once again we
have another example of responding to an argument
without any effort to actually address the
argument but the thing I find absolutely hilarious
about this new definition is how of all people
the famous apologist Alvin Plantinga himself
personally debunked it as far back as the 1960s
all you have to do is imagine a man called mr.
Mick ear who just so happens to have one essential
property he has only the power to scratch his ear
and nothing else thus by definition any other
task you challenge him to complete as a logical
violation of his essential nature hardly an
all-powerful being wouldn't you say yet according
to our new definition mr. McKee ear is still just
as omnipotent as Almighty God himself all tangents
aside the real problem with this whole essential
nature business is just that essentialism the
idea that there exists some kind of intrinsic
essence to things which makes them what they are
it's a perfectly natural bias through which human
beings tend to look at the world but it's still
completely bogus ever since the Greek philosopher
Plutarch introduced the Theseus paradox back in
the 1st century philosophers have had very good
reasons to reject essentialism as a worthless
incoherent concept a chair does not have some
magically objective essence of chair ness that
makes it a chair it's just some arrangement of
physical material stuff that human beings have
arbitrarily decided to sit on and call a chair
likewise there is no such thing as essence of
godliness that would make God God rather there
is only a distinct collection of empirically
verifiable properties which if demonstrated would
earn some lucky entity the official title of God
so not only do we have Christians pushing yet
another idea of omnipotence that just doesn't
work but it's grounded on philosophical
presumptions that have been categorically
debunked for almost 2,000 years however it really
needs to be emphasized that all of these crazy
problems would vanish in a heartbeat if only
the Christians would just stop insisting on such
bungled definitions it's sad too because it's
really not that hard to come up with something
relatively functional so let's do the theists job
for them and just define omnipotence in a way that
isn't stupid shall we omnipotence the capacity to
create destroy and rearrange matter and energy in
accordance with arbitrary whims they're done if we
ever encounter any being with this kind of power I
will be more than happy to refer to such a being
as omnipotent and he create rocks sure can he
lift rocks absolutely but can he create a rock so
heavy that even its own maker cannot lift it nope
not a chance but guess what that's perfectly okay
because still logically consistent with the stated
definition notice how a definition like this also
solves all kinds of goofy philosophical issues for
example one lesser-known problem with omnipotence
is the problem of creating two omnipotent beings
at once so let's imagine a possible world wearing
two beings are both competing for the official
title of omnipotent deity all we have to do is
make a game out of it challenge one guy to turn
my car into a pile of squirrels while challenging
the other guy to turn it into a sack of potatoes
whichever outcome occurs will then determine which
guy is the loser and which guy earns the title
done or better yet let's consider another lesser
known problem I challenge you to truthfully tell
me what I ate for dinner last year you'll notice
that this is not really so much a test of power
but rather a test of knowledge yet according to
most classical definitions for omnipotence there
is no distinction the omnipotent being must be
able to do it because I formulated the challenge
as a logically coherent action if however we adopt
the new definition then it is now possible for a
being to be omnipotent but not necessarily
omniscient all-powerful and all-knowing are
now philosophically distinct concepts as we
should reasonably expect them to be notice
also of how there are still many possible ways to
potentially break the definition for example could
an omnipotent being create another omnipotent
being or what if I challenge the being to kill
itself would that violate the definition maybe
maybe not but you'll notice I'm not racking my
brain with obtuse rationalizations just to protect
a stupid definition if it works then great and if
not then oh well we'll just think of something
better later the ultimate irony in this entire
discussion is that when all is said and done I'm
basically just fixing the theists philosophical
problems for them yet if past experience is any
guide the overwhelming majority of them will never
see it that way instead they'll probably view
this entire discussion as a literal attack on
God himself as if the words used to describe some
possible entity might have real power over whether
or not it actually exists that's what happens
when you live your life defending Dogma rather
than honestly searching for a better understand of
the world but the thing I find really embarrassing
about this entire debate is that by clinging to
their philosophically warped definitions it's
the Christians themselves who are logically
forcing their God squarely into the realm of
non-existence even if there were a god-like thing
somewhere out there in the cosmos for us to meet
the rules of language would prevent us from ever
rationally calling it such thanks for listening